The COCO/NumBBO experiments interface
=====================================

<a href="https://github.com/numbbo/coco">COCO (COmparing Continuous Optimisers)</a> is a platform 
for systematic and sound comparisons of real-parameter global optimisers mainly developed within the 
<a href="http://numbbo.gforge.inria.fr/doku.php">NumBBO project</a>. COCO provides benchmark function 
testbeds, experimentation templates which are easy to parallelize, and tools for processing and 
visualizing data generated by one or several optimizers.

For a getting started guide see [here](https://github.com/numbbo/coco/blob/master/README.md#getting-started). 

__Reimplementation of COCO in ANSI C__

In order to allow for easier maintenance and further extensions of the COCO platform, it was rewritten
entirely from 2014 till 2016. Now, a single implementation in ANSI C (aka C89) is used and called from
the other languages to conduct the experiments. This documentation of the COCO C code serves therefore
as the basic reference for:
- [How to conduct benchmarking experiments in C](#benchmarking)
- [How to write new test functions and combine them into test suites](#new-suites)
- [How to write additional performance indicators and logging functionality](#new-indicators)

__Pointers to the source code and other documentation__

The actual source code of COCO can be found at http://github.com/numbbo/coco

More information about the biobjective test suite (bbob-biobj) can be found at
http://numbbo.github.io/bbob-biobj-functions-doc

How to conduct experiments in all supported languages is described at
http://numbbo.github.io/bbob-biobj-experiments-doc (coming soon)

## How to conduct benchmarking experiments in C <a name="benchmarking"></a>

At this point we assume that the ``example_experiment`` in C is running on your machine (see the 
[getting started guide](https://github.com/numbbo/coco/blob/master/README.md#getting-started) if you 
need any assistance). The best way to create your own benchmark experiment is to copy that example and
make the changes you need to include your optimizer. 

Benchmarking the algorithm ``my_optimizer`` on the ``bbob-biobj`` suite with default parameters 
(see below for explanation of the [suite parameters](#suite-parameters) and 
[observer parameters](#observer-parameters)) is invoked in the following way:

    coco_suite_t *suite;
    coco_observer_t *observer;
    coco_problem_t *problem;

    suite = coco_suite("bbob-biobj", "", "");
    observer = coco_observer("bbob-biobj", "");

    while ((problem = coco_suite_get_next_problem(suite, observer)) != NULL) {
      my_optimizer(problem);
    }

    coco_observer_free(observer);
    coco_suite_free(suite);

The ``coco_suite_t`` object is a collection of (in this case biobjective) optimization problems of 
type ``coco_problem_t``. The while loop iterates through all problems of the suite and optimizes 
each of them with ``my_optimizer`` (a simple random search is used in the ``example_experiment``). 
The ``coco_observer_t`` object takes care of logging the performance of the optimizer. Note that 
this benchmarking procedure remains the same whether we are dealing with single- 
or multi-objective problems and algorithms. To perform benchmarking on a different suite and with a 
different observer, just replace ``"bbob-biobj"`` with the name of the desired suite and observer. 

The optimizer should be run until ``dimension * BUDGET`` number of evaluations have been reached. 
In the ``example_experiment``, the ``BUDGET`` is conservatively set using

    static const size_t BUDGET = 2;

so that the experiment runs quickly. You need to increase the budget for your real benchmarking
experiments, but do so gradually (you might want to test ``BUDGET = 1e2`` before you use any larger
values) to see how it effects the running time of the benchmark. 

In the above example, the suite and observer are called without additional parameters (the empty 
strings ``""`` are used), which means that their default values apply. These can be changed by 
calling:

    suite = coco_suite("bbob-biobj", suite_instance, suite_options);
    observer = coco_observer("bbob-biobj", observer_options);

where ``suite_instance``, ``suite_options`` and ``observer_options`` are strings with parameters 
encoded  as pairs ``"key: value"``. When the value consists of one or more integers, it can be 
encoded using  the syntax ``m-n`` (meaning all integer values from m to n), ``-n`` (meaning all 
values up to n), ``n-`` (meaning all values from n on) and even ``-`` (meaning all available 
values); or by simply listing the values separated by commas (as in ``2,3,5``). No spaces are 
allowed in the definition of a range or list of values. 

### Suite parameters <a name="suite-parameters"></a>

The suite contains a collection of problems constructed by a Cartesian product of the suite's 
optimization  functions, dimensions and instances. The functions and dimensions are defined by the 
suite name, while the instances are defined with the ``suite_instance`` parameter. The suite can be 
filtered by specifying functions, dimensions and instances through the ``suite_options`` parameter. 

Possible keys and values for ``suite_instance`` are:
- either ``"year: YEAR"``, where ``YEAR`` is usually the year of the corresponding [BBOB 
workshop](http://numbbo.github.io/workshops) defining the instances used in that year's benchmark,
- or ``"instances: VALUES"``, where ``VALUES`` is a list or a range ``m-n`` of instances you wish 
to include in the suite (starting from 1).

If both ``year`` and ``instances`` appear in the ``suite_instance`` string, only the first one is 
taken into account. If no ``suite_instance`` is given, it defaults to the year of the current BBOB 
workshop. 

Possible keys and values for ``suite_options`` are:
- ``dimensions: LIST``, where ``LIST`` is the list of dimensions to keep in the suite (range-style
syntax is not allowed here), 
- ``dimension_indices: VALUES``, where ``VALUES`` is a list or a range of dimension indices (starting 
from 1) to keep in the suite, and
- ``function_indices: VALUES``, where ``VALUES`` is a list or a range of function indices (starting 
from 1) to keep in the suite, and
- ``instance_indices: VALUES``, where ``VALUES`` is a list or a range of instance indices (starting 
from 1) to keep in the suite. 

If both ``dimensions`` and ``dimension_indices`` appear in the ``suite_options`` string, only the first 
one is taken into account. If no ``suite_options`` is given, no filtering by functions, dimensions and
instances is performed, i.e. the experiment will be run on the entire benchmark suite. 

For example, the call:

    suite = coco_suite("bbob-biobj", 
                       "instances: 10-20", 
                       "dimensions: 2,3,5,10,20 instance_indices:1-5");

first creates the biobjective suite with instances 10 to 20, but then uses only the first five 
dimensions (skipping dimension 40) and the first five instances (i.e. instances 10 to 14) of the suite. 

This kind of filtering can be helpful when parallelizing the benchmark.

See [biobjective test suite](http://numbbo.github.io/bbob-biobj-functions-doc) and 
[bbob test sute](http://numbbo.github.io/bbob-functions-doc) for more detailed information on the two 
currently supported suites.

### Observer parameters <a name="observer-parameters"></a>

The observer controls the logging that is performed within the benchmark. Some observer parameters are 
general, while others are specific to the chosen observer. 

Possible keys and values for the general ``observer_options`` are:
- ``result_folder: NAME``, determines the folder within the "exdata" folder into which the results will 
be output. If the folder with the given name already exists, first NAME_001 will be tried, then NAME_002 
and so on. The default value is "default".
- ``algorithm_name: NAME``, where ``NAME`` is a short name of the algorithm that will be used in plots 
(no spaces are allowed). The default value is "ALG".
- ``algorithm_info: STRING`` stores the description of the algorithm. If it contains spaces, it must be 
surrounded by double quotes. The default value is "" (no description).
- ``number_target_triggers: VALUE`` defines the number of targets between each 10**i and 10**(i+1)
(equally spaced in the logarithmic scale) that trigger logging. The default value is 100.
- ``target_precision: VALUE`` defines the precision used for targets (there are no targets for
abs(values) < target_precision). The default value is 1e-8.
- ``number_evaluation_triggers: VALUE`` defines the number of evaluations to be logged between each 10**i
and 10**(i+1). The default value is 20.
- ``base_evaluation_triggers: VALUES`` defines the base evaluations used to produce an additional
evaluation-based logging. The numbers of evaluations that trigger logging are every
base_evaluation * dimension * (10**i). For example, if base_evaluation_triggers = "1,2,5", the logger will
be triggered by evaluations dim*1, dim*2, dim*5, 10*dim*1, 10*dim*2, 10*dim*5, 100*dim*1, 100*dim*2,
100*dim*5, ... The default value is "1,2,5". 
- ``precision_x: VALUE`` defines the precision used when outputting variables and corresponds to the 
number of digits to be printed after the decimal point. The default value is 8.
- ``precision_f: VALUE`` defines the precision used when outputting f values and corresponds to the 
number of digits to be printed after the decimal point. The default value is 15.

Possible keys and values for the ``observer_options`` of the ``bbob-biobj`` observer are:
- ``log_nondominated: STRING`` determines which nondominated solutions to log. ``STRING`` can take 
on the values ``none`` (don't log nondominated solutions), ``final`` (log only the final nondominated 
solutions) and ``all`` (log every solution that is nondominated at creation time). The default value
is all.
- ``log_decision_variables: STRING`` determines whether the decision variables are to be logged
in addition to the objective variables in the output of nondominated solutions. ``STRING`` can take 
on the values ``none`` (don't output decision variables), ``low_dim``(output decision variables only 
for dimensions lower or equal to 5) and ``all`` (output all decision variables). The default value is 
log_dim. 
- ``compute_indicators : VALUE`` determines whether to compute and output performance indicators 
(``1``) or not (``0``). The default value is 1.
- ``produce_all_data: VALUE`` determines whether to produce all data required for the workshop. If 
set to ``1``, it overwrites some other options and is equivalent to setting ``log_nondominated`` to 
``all``, ``log_decision_variables`` to ``log_dim`` and ``compute_indicators`` to ``1``. If set to 
``0``, it does not change the values of the other options. The default value is 0.

You can also run the benchmark without any observer, which produces no output, by invoking either 
``""`` or ``"no_observer"`` in place of the observer name. 

### Problem evaluation <a name="problem-evaluation"></a>

In order to evaluate the problem, call the function:

    void coco_evaluate_function(coco_problem_t *problem, const double *x, double *y);

It will evaluate the problem function in point ``x`` and save the result in ``y``.

In order to evaluate the constraints of the problem, call the function:

    void coco_evaluate_function(coco_problem_t *problem, const double *x, double *y);

It will evaluate the problem constraints in point ``x`` and save the result in ``y``. Note: while this
functionality is provided, the framework does not yet include problems with constraints.

### Problem properties <a name="problem-properties"></a>

To learn more about the problem, you can access its properties in the following way:

    /* Returns the number of variables i.e. dimension of the problem */
    size_t coco_problem_get_dimension(const coco_problem_t *problem);

    /* Returns a vector of size 'dimension' with lower bounds of the region of interest in 
     * the decision space. */
    const double *coco_problem_get_smallest_values_of_interest(const coco_problem_t *problem);

    /* Returns a vector of size 'dimension' with upper bounds of the region of interest in 
     * the decision space. */
    const double *coco_problem_get_largest_values_of_interest(const coco_problem_t *problem);

    /* Returns the number of objectives of the problem */
    size_t coco_problem_get_number_of_objectives(const coco_problem_t *problem);

    /* Returns the number of evaluations done on the problem */
    size_t coco_problem_get_evaluations(coco_problem_t *problem);

See the ``coco.h`` file for more information on these and other functions you can use to interface 
COCO problem and other COCO structures. 

## How to write new test functions and combine them into test suites <a name="new-suites"></a>

COMING SOON...

## How to write additional performance indicators and logging functionality <a name="new-indicators"></a>

COMING SOON...
